# Aagaard_ZIKV_AGOHITSCLIP

Primary human trophoblast isolation and ZIKV infection. Placentas from 5 healthy term pregnancies were collected from recruited mothers with informed consent at Harris County Ben Taub Hospital in Houston Texas. All pregnancies were heathy term pregnancies free of major obstetrical or other health complications that delivered by scheduled cesarian section. Placentas were subject to cytotrophoblast purification as described previously 11. Cytotrophoblasts were seeded in 60 cm dishes and maintained with DMEM:F12 media (Gibco, 11320-033) supplemented with + 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco, 16140-071) + 1% penicillin-streptomycin (P/S; Gibco, 15140-122). Media was changed daily for 2-4 days until cells differentiated into syncytiotrophoblasts confirmed by peak β-human chorionic gonadotropin expression. At 5 days post-isolation, differentiated primary human trophoblasts cell plates from each patient (105-90 million cells/replicate) were either mock-infected with PBS or infected with a contemporary first-passage ZIKV strain HN16 (GenBank accession KY328289.1)10,14 at an MOI of 1 plaque-forming unit (PFU) and harvested 24 hours post-infection.

Argonaut High-throughput Sequencing UV-crosslinking and Immunoprecipitation (AGO-HITS-CLIP). AGO-HITS-CLIP was done largely as described previously80,81 with the exclusion of photoactivatable ribonucleoside (PAR) analog thiouridine. Monolayers of cells were removed from culture washed three times with ice-cold PBS and immediately subject to UV-crosslinking while on ice. Two rounds of 1000 J/cm2 at 265 nm was completed using a GS Gene Linker (BioRad, 165-5031). Cells were then scraped, pooled for mock or ZIKV infected and centrifuged at 800 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C in a 50 mL conical tube. The pellets and tubes were then flash-frozen by emersion in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C for further processing. Cell pellets were lysed in NP40 lysis buffer (Invitrogen, FNN0021) which contained 0.5 mM of DL-Dithiothreitol (Sigma D0632), and protease inhibitor (cOmplete, EDTA-free, Roche 11873580001). Lysates were centrifuged (4000 x g for 15 mins at 4°C) and supernatants were then filtered through a 5 μm membrane filter tube (Fisher Scientific NC0406588) before treatment with RNase T1 at room temperature. Dynabeads protein G (Invitrogen, 10003D) were then coupled to 0.125 μg/mL anti-Argonaut 2 antibody clone 11A9 (Millipore, MABE253) for immunoprecipitation.  Beads were added to lysates (10 μl/mL) and incubated for 1 hour rotating at 4°C. Beads were washed three times with lysis buffer, resuspended and again digested RNase T1 for 15 minutes.  Several high-salt stringent washes were done (50 mL HEPES-KOH, 85 mL 2M KCl, 500 μl NP40 lysis buffer per liter), and resuspended in T4 RNA Ligase Reaction Buffer (New England Biolabs, B0216L). Samples were incubated 37°C for 10 minutes with calf-intestinal phosphatase at 0.5 U/μl (New England Biolabs M0290L) then washed and resuspended in polynucleotide kinase buffer and incubated with T4 polynucleotide kinase (1 U/μl) (New England Biolabs, M0236L) and 0.5 uCi,1.6 μM 32P-radiolabeled ATP (Perkin Elmer, BLU002250UC), and incubated at 37°C. After 30 minutes, non-radioactive ATP was added to a final concentration of 100 μM for 5 mins to ensure complete 5’ phosphorylation. The reaction was stopped with a 95°C incubation and radioactive excess removed with sequential polynucleotide kinase buffer washes. Beads were then treated with SDS-PAGE buffer and heated to 95°C. The protein bound RNA was then separated on a Novex™ NuPAGE™ 4-12% bis-tris protein gel (1.5 mm, Invitrogen NP0335BOX). The gels were phosphoimaged and radioactive RNA bound Argonaut band excised. Bands were then electro-eluted at 100V for two hours in MOPS buffer in midi-D-tube dialyzers (Millipore, 71506-3). Proteinase K reaction buffer was added (1:1) and proteinase K (Roche, EO0491) added and incubated at 55°C for 30 minutes. To precipitate the RNA 1:10 volume of 3M sodium acetate was added, followed by a 1:1 volume of acid phenol chloroform (with IAA, 125:24:1, Invitrogen, AM9720), vortexed then centrifuged for 10 mins at maximum speed. Ultrapure chloroform was then added to the recovered upper phase (1:1), vortexed, centrifuged, and the upper aqueous phase removed. Ultrapure glycogen (1 μL, Invitrogen, 10814-010) and three times volume of ethanol were then added, and the samples incubated for 2 hours at -20°C before centrifugation at 4°C for 30 minutes at maximum speed. RNA pellets were washed and resuspended in ultrapure water. These RNAs were then eluted and prepared for NGS using the TruSeq small RNA library Set A (Illumina RS-200-0012 ) per manufacturers instruction. Briefly, ligations of the 3’ and then 5’ adapters were made sequentially through incubations using T4_2 RNA ligase deletion mutant (Epicentre, LR2D11310K) and T4 RNA ligase, reverse transcribed using Super Script III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, 18080-044), and barcodes were added during PCR amplification of the cDNA by PCR (15 cycles, 60°C) using a high-fidelity polymerase of the TruSeq kit. The labeled amplified product was then subjected to gel purification to separate excess reagents and short read contaminants. Samples were mixed with 20 μl of 5x Novex Hi-Density TBE sample dye (Invitrogen, LC6678) and separated on a Novex® TBE Gels, 6% gel (Invitrogen, EC6265BOX). The gel lanes were divided into separate culture dishes, each lane stained with ethidium bromide, and bands excised under UV illumination, placed in GelBreaker tubes (IST Engineering, 3388-100), and briefly centrifuged. The samples were then incubated overnight with 450 μL ultrapure water at 4°C with mild agitation. The resuspended sample was then added to a 5 μm filter tube and centrifuged at 600 rpm, 50 μL of 3 M sodium acetate added to the filtrate, before a vortex and brief incubation at room temperature. Ultrapure glycogen (2 μL) and 1.4 mL ethanol was then added to each sample, before vortexing and incubating at -20°C for two hours. The sample was then pelleted, washed, and air dried, before resuspension in 8 μL ultrapure water and 2 μl of 5x Novex Hi-Density TBE sample dye. The samples were then again separated on a 6% TBE gel, excised, recovered in water in an overnight incubation, filtered, and precipitated, all as above for a final purification step, ready for sequencing. The libraries were then subjected to automated electrophoresis quality assurance for purity and concentration, and single-end sequenced using the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform (50-51 bp reads) at the Baylor College of Medicine Human Genome Sequencing Center.


Ribonomics analyses. Reads were pre-processed and quality filtered using FastqQC (v0.11.9). Barcodes and adapters were trimmed using Trimmomatic82 (v0.33). Reads were aligned to custom human + ZIKV + hsa-miRbase transcriptome (see GRCh38.p13_and_NC_012532.1_and_ hsamiRbase22.1.gtf) using STAR83 (v2.7.8). PCR duplicate reads were removed using Picard84 (v2.24.0). Unique reads were counted using HTseq85 (v0.11.1). Counts from the 5 mock and 4 infected biological replicates were analyzed by differential expression (DE) in R (v4.0.2) using DEseq286 (v3.12). AGO-HITS-CLIP peaks were called with Piranha87 (v1.2.1) or PureCLIP88 (v1.3.1). Positive or negative-sense reads-per-million-scaled (RPM) reads, and CLIP peaks were converted to bigwig files for visualization on the UCSC genome browser89 (hg38). Host miRNAs with different accumulation levels were analyzed by mirPath26 (v3, DIANA Tools) using the MicroT-CDS database25 (v5) and visualized using the Kanehisa Laboratories Pathway Viewer.


GEO Contents: The AGO-HITS-CLIP and spatial transcriptomics data have been deposited to the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO accessions GSE205609 and GSE205631). The custom human+ZIKV+hsa-miRbase reference (GRCh38.p13_and_NC_012532.1_and_hsamiRbase22.1.gtf) and scripts used for AGO-HITS-CLIP and spatial transcriptomics analyses are available at https://github.com/Aagaardlab/ZIKV_AGOHITSCLIP and https://github.com/Aagaardlab/murineplacenta_spatialtranscriptomics respectively.

# Repository Contents

(A) Custom reference GRCh38.p13_and_NC_012532.1_and_hsamiRbase22.1.gtf and the bash script used to make it. 

(B) Bash script for pre-processing and quality filtering reads, trimming adapters/barcodes, generating the custom reference, alignment using STAR, deduplication, counts matrix generation, and bigwig visualization.

(C) R script used for differential expression analysis.

(D) Bash and R scripts used for analyzing Lum et al. (2019) term placenta datasets.

(E) Bash and R scripts used to download and analyze the Dang et al. (2019) miR-seq, bulk RNA-seq, and iCLIP datasets.

# Workflow
Reads were pre-processed, and quality filtered using FastqQC (v0.11.9). 

Barcodes and adapters were trimmed using Trimmomatic (v0.33). 

Reads were aligned to custom human + ZIKV + hsa-miRbase transcriptome (see GRCh38.p13_and_NC_012532.1_and_hsamiRbase22.1.gtf) using STAR (v2.7.8). 

PCR duplicate reads were removed using Picard (v2.24.0). 

Unique reads were counted using HTseq (v0.11.1). 

Counts from the 5 mock and 4 infected biological replicates were used for differential expression analysis in R (v4.0.2) using DEseq2 (v3.12). 

AGO-HITS-CLIP peaks were called with Piranha (v1.2.1) or PureCLIP (v1.3.1). 

Positive or negative-sense reads-per-million-scaled (RPM) reads and CLIP peaks were converted to bigwig files for visualization on the USCS genome browser (hg38). 
